---
type: concept
title: iep wittgenstein
slug: concept-iep-wittgenstein
source: Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
sourceUrl: "https://www.iep.utm.edu/"
wordCount: 3189
encoding: iep
importedAt: 2026-04-20
---

# iep wittgenstein



## Compiled Understanding

iep wittgenstein. 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889—1951) Ludwig Wittgenstein is one of the most influential philosophers of the twentieth century, and regarded by some as the most important since Immanuel Kant . His early work was influenced by that of Arthur Schopenhauer and, especially, by his teacher Bertrand Russell and by Gottlob Frege , who became something of a friend. This work culminated in the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus , the only philosophy book that Wittgenstein published during his lifetime. It claimed to solve all the major problems of philosophy and was held in especially high esteem by the anti-metaphysical logical positivists . The Tractatus is based on the idea that philosophical problems arise from misunderstandings of the logic of language, and it tries to show what this logic is. Wittgenstein&#8217;s later work, principally his Philosophical Investigations , shares this concern with logic and language , but takes a different, less technical, approach to philosophical problems. This book helped to inspire so-called ordinary language philosophy . This style of doing philosophy has fallen somewhat out of favor, but Wittgenstein&#8217;s work on rule-following and private language is still considered important, and his later philosophy is influential in a growing number of fields outside philosophy. Table of Contents Life Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus Ethics and Religion Conception of Philosophy Meaning Rules and Private Language Realism and Anti-Realism Certainty Continuity Wittgenstein in History References and Further Reading Wittgenstein’s Main Works Some Biographies of Wittgenstein Secondary Works 1. Life Ludwig Josef Johann Wittgenstein, born on April 26th 1889 in Vienna, Austria, was a charismatic enigma. He has been something of a cult figure but shunned publicity and even built an isolated hut in Norway to live in complete seclusion. His sexuality was ambiguous but he was probably gay; how actively so is still a matter of controversy. His life seems to have been dominated by an obsession with moral and philosophical perfection, summed up in the subtitle of Ray Monk&#8217;s excellent biography Wittgenstein: The Duty of Genius. His concern with moral perfection led Wittgenstein at one point to insist on confessing to several people various sins, including that of allowing others to underestimate the extent of his &#8216;Jewishness&#8217;. His father Karl Wittgenstein&#8217;s parents were born Jewish but converted to Protestantism and his mother Leopoldine (nee Kalmus) was Catholic, but her father was of Jewish descent. Wittgenstein himself was baptized in a Catholic church and was given a Catholic burial, although between baptism and burial he was neither a practicing nor a believing Catholic. The Wittgenstein family was large and wealthy. Karl Wittgenstein was one of the most successful businessmen in the Austro-Hungarian Empire, leading the iron and steel industry there. The Wittgensteins&#8217; home attracted people of culture, especially musicians, including the composer Johannes Brahms, who was a friend of the family. Music remained important to Wittgenstein throughout his life. So did darker matters. Ludwig was the youngest of eight children, and of his four brothers, three committed suicide. As for his career, Wittgenstein studied mechanical engineering in Berlin and in 1908 went to Manchester, England to do research in aeronautics, experimenting with kites. His interest in engineering led to an interest in mathematics which in turn got him thinking about philosophical questions about the foundations of mathematics. He visited the mathematician and philosopher Gottlob Frege (1848-1925), who recommended that he study with Bertrand Russell (1872-1970) in Cambridge. At Cambridge Wittgenstein greatly impressed Russell and G.E. Moore (1873- 1958), and began work on logic. When his father died in 1913 Wittgenstein inherited a fortune, which he quickly gave away. When war broke out the next year, he volunteered for the Austrian army. He continued his philosophical work and won several medals for bravery during the war. The result of his thinking on logic was the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus which was eventually published in English in 1922 with Russell&#8217;s help. This was the only book Wittgenstein published during his lifetime. Having thus, in his opinion, solved all the problems of philosophy, Wittgenstein became an elementary school teacher in rural Austria, where his approach was strict and unpopular, but apparently effective. He spent 1926-28 meticulously designing and building an austere house in Vienna for his sister Gretl. In 1929 he returned to Cambridge to teach at Trinity College, recognizing that in fact he had more work to do in philosophy. He became professor of philosophy at Cambridge in 1939. During World War II he worked as a hospital porter in London and as a research technician in Newcastle. After the war he returned to university teaching but resigned his professorship in 1947 to concentrate on writing. Much of this he did in Ireland, preferring isolated rural places for his work. By 1949 he had written all the material that was published after his death as Philosophical Investigations , arguably his most important work. He spent the last two years of his life in Vienna, Oxford and Cambridge and kept working until he died of prostate cancer in Cambridge in April 1951. His work from these last years has been published as On Certainty . His last words were, &#8220;Tell them I&#8217;ve had a wonderful life.&#8221; 2. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus Wittgenstein told Ludwig von Ficker that the point of the Tractatus was ethical. In the preface to the book he says that its value consists in two things: &#8220;that thoughts are expressed in it&#8221; and &#8220;that it shows how little is achieved when these problems are solved.&#8221; The problems he refers to are the problems of philosophy defined, we may suppose, by the work of Frege and Russell , and perhaps also Schopenhauer . At the end of the book Wittgenstein says &#8220;My propositions serve as elucidations in the following way: anyone who understands me eventually recognizes them as nonsensical&#8221; [emphasis added]. What to make of the Tractatus , its author, and the propositions it contains, then, is no easy matter. The book certainly does not seem to be about ethics. It consists of numbered propositions in seven sets. Proposition 1.2 belongs to the first set and is a comment on proposition 1. Proposition 1.21 is about proposition 1.2, and so on. The seventh set contains only one proposition, the famous &#8220;What we cannot speak about we must pass over in silence.&#8221; Some important and representative propositions from the book are these: 1 The world is all that is the case. 4.01 A proposition is a picture of reality. 4.0312 &#8230;My fundamental idea is that the &#8216;logical constants&#8217; are not representatives; that there can be no representatives of the logic of facts. 4.121 &#8230;Propositions show the logical form of reality. They display it. 4.1212 What can be shown, cannot be said. 4.5 &#8230;The general form of a proposition is: This is how things stand. 5.43 &#8230;all the propositions of logic say the same thing, to wit nothing. 5.4711 To give the essence of a proposition means to give the essence of all description, and thus the essence of the world. 5.6 The limits of my language mean the limits of my world. Here and elsewhere in the Tractatus Wittgenstein seems to be saying that the essence of the world and of life is: This is how things are. One is tempted to add &#8220;&#8211;deal with it.&#8221; That seems to fit what Cora Diamond has called his &#8220;accept and endure&#8221; ethics, but he says that the propositions of the Tractatus are meaningless , not profound insights, ethical or otherwise. What are we to make of this? Many commentators ignore or dismiss what Wittgenstein said about his work and its aims, and instead look for regular philosophical theories in his work. The most famous of these in the Tractatus is the &#8220;picture theory&#8221; of meaning. According to this theory propositions are meaningful insofar as they picture states of affairs or matters of empirical fact. Anything normative, supernatural or (one might say) metaphysical must, it therefore seems, be nonsense. This has been an influential reading of parts of the Tractatus . Unfortunately, this reading leads to serious problems since by its own lights the Tractatus&#8217; use of words like &#8220;object,&#8221; &#8220;reality&#8221; and &#8220;world&#8221; is illegitimate. These concepts are purely formal or a priori . A statement such as &#8220;There are objects in the world&#8221; does not picture a state of affairs. Rather it is, as it were, presupposed by the notion of a state of affairs. The &#8220;picture theory&#8221; therefore denies sense to just the kind of statements of which the Tractatus is composed, to the framework supporting the picture theory itself. In this way the Tractatus pulls the rug out from under its own feet. If the propositions of the Tractatus are nonsensical then they surely cannot put forward the picture theory of meaning, or any other theory. Nonsense is nonsense. However, this is not to say that the Tractatus itself is without value. Wittgenstein&#8217;s aim seems to have been to show up as nonsense the things that philosophers (himself included) are tempted to say. Philosophical theories, he suggests, are attempts to answer questions that are not really questions at all (they are nonsense), or to solve problems that are not really problems. He says in proposition 4.003 that: Most of the propositions and questions of philosophers arise from our failure to understand the logic of our language. (They belong to the same class as the question whether the good is more or less identical than the beautiful.) And it is not surprising that the deepest problems are in fact not problems at all. Philosophers, then, have the task of presenting the logic of our language clearly. This will not solve important problems but it will show that some things that we take to be important problems are really not problems at all. The gain is not wisdom but an absence of confusion. This is not a rejection of philosophy or logic. Wittgenstein took philosophical puzzlement very seriously indeed, but he thought that it needed dissolving by analysis rather than solving by the production of theories. The Tractatus presents itself as a key for untying a series of knots both profound and highly technical. 3. Ethics and Religion Wittgenstein had a lifelong interest in religion and claimed to see every problem from a religious point of view, but never committed himself to any formal religion. His various remarks on ethics also suggest a particular point of view, and Wittgenstein often spoke of ethics and religion together. This point of view or attitude can be seen in the four main themes that run through Wittgenstein&#8217;s writings on ethics and religion: goodness, value or meaning are not to be found in the world; living the right way involves acceptance of or agreement with the world, or life, or God&#8217;s will, or fate; one who lives this way will see the world as a miracle; there is no answer to the problem of life&#8211;the solution is the disappearance of the problem. Certainly Wittgenstein worried about being morally good or even perfect, and he had great respect for sincere religious conviction, but he also said, in his 1929 lecture on ethics, that &#8220;the tendency of all men who ever tried to write or talk Ethics or Religion was to run against the boundaries of language,&#8221; i.e. to talk or write nonsense. This gives support to the view that Wittgenstein believed in mystical truths that somehow cannot be expressed meaningfully but that are of the utmost importance. It is hard to conceive, though, what these &#8216;truths&#8217; might be. An alternative view is that Wittgenstein believed that there is really nothing to say about ethics. This would explain why he wrote less and less about ethics as his life wore on. His &#8220;accept and endure&#8221; attitude and belief in going &#8220;the bloody hard way&#8221; are evident in all his work, especially after the Tractatus . Wittgenstein wants his reader not to think (too much) but to look at the &#8220;language games&#8221; (any practices that involve language) that give rise to philosophical (personal, existential, spiritual) problems. His approach to such problems is painstaking, thorough, open-eyed and receptive. His ethical attitude is an integral part of his method and shows itself as such. But there is little to say about such an attitude short of recommending it. In Culture and Value p.29e Wittgenstein writes: Rules of life are dressed up in pictures. And these pictures can only serve to describe what we are to do, not justify it. Because they could provide a justification only if they held good in other respects as well. I can say: &#8220;Thank these bees for their honey as though they were kind people who have prepared it for you&#8221;; that is intelligible and describes how I should like you to conduct yourself. But I cannot say: &#8220;Thank them because, look, how kind they are!&#8221;&#8211;since the next moment they may sting you. In a world of contingency one cannot prove that a particular attitude is the correct one to take. If this suggests relativism, it should be remembered that it too is just one more attitude or point of view, and one without the rich tradition and accumulated wisdom, philosophical reasoning and personal experience of, say, orthodox Christianity or Judaism. Indeed crude relativism, the universal judgement that one cannot make universal judgements, is self- contradictory. Whether Wittgenstein&#8217;s views suggest a more sophisticated form of relativism is another matter, but the spirit of relativism seems far from Wittgenstein&#8217;s conservatism and absolute intolerance of his own moral shortcomings. Compare the tolerance that motivates relativism with Wittgenstein&#8217;s assertion to Russell that he would prefer &#8220;by far&#8221; an organization dedicated to war and slavery to one dedicated to peace and freedom. (This assertion, however, should not be taken literally: Wittgenstein was no war-monger and even recommended letting oneself be massacred rather than taking part in hand-to-hand combat. It was apparently the complacency, and perhaps the self-righteousness, of Russell&#8217;s liberal cause that Wittgenstein objected to.) With regard to religion, Wittgenstein is often considered a kind of Anti-Realist (see below for more on this). He opposed interpretations of religion that emphasize doctrine or philosophical arguments intended to prove God&#8217;s existence, but was greatly drawn to religious rituals and symbols, and considered becoming a priest. He likened the ritual of religion to a great gesture, as when one kisses a photograph. This is not based on the false belief that the person in the photograph will feel the kiss or return it, nor is it based on any other belief. Neither is the kiss just a substitute for a particular phrase, like &#8220;I love you.&#8221; Like the kiss, religious activity does express an attitude, but it is not just the expression of an attitude in the sense that several other forms of expression might do just as well. There might be no substitute that would do. The same might be said of the whole language-game (or games) of religion, but this is a controversial point. If religious utterances, such as &#8220;God exists,&#8221; are treated as gestures of a certain kind then this seems not to be treating them as literal statements. Many religious believers, including Wittgensteinian ones, would object strongly to this. There is room, though, for a good deal of sophisticated disagreement about what it means to take a statement literally. For instance, Charles Taylor&#8217;s view, roughly, is that the real is whatever will not go away. If we cannot reduce talk about God to anything else, or replace it, or prove it false, then perhaps God is as real as anything else. 4. Conception of Philosophy Wittgenstein&#8217;s view of what philosophy is, or should be, changed little over his life. In the Tractatus he says at 4.111 that &#8220;philosophy is not one of the natural sciences,&#8221; and at 4.112 &#8220;Philosophy aims at the logical clarification of thoughts.&#8221; Philosophy is not descriptive but elucidatory. Its aim is to clear up muddle and confusion. It follows that philosophers should not concern themselves so much with what is actual, keeping up with the latest popularizations of science, say, which Wittgenstein despised. The philosopher&#8217;s proper concern is with what is possible, or rather with what is conceivable. This depends on our concepts and the ways they fit together as seen in language. What is conceivable and what is not, what makes sense and what does not, depends on the rules of language, of grammar. In Philosophical Investigations Sect. 90 Wittgenstein says: Our investigation is a grammatical one. Such an investigation sheds light on our problem by clearing misunderstandings away. Misunderstandings concerning the use of words, caused, among other things, by certain analogies between the forms of expression in different regions of language. The similarities between the sentences &#8220;I&#8217;ll keep it in mind&#8221; and &#8220;I&#8217;ll keep it in this box,&#8221; for instance, (along with many others) can lead one to think of the mind as a thing something like a box with contents of its own. The nature of this box and its mental contents can then seem very mysterious. Wittgenstein suggests that one way, at least, to deal with such mysteries is to recall the different things one says about minds, memories, thoughts and so on, in a variety of contexts. What one says, or what people in general say, can change. Ways of life and uses of language change, so meanings change, but not utterly and instantaneously. Things shift and evolve, but rarely if ever so drastically that we lose all grip on meaning. So there is no timeless essence of at least some and perhaps all concepts, but we still understand one another well enough most of the time. When nonsense is spoken or written, or when something just seems fishy, we can sniff it out. The road out of confusion can be a long and difficult one, hence the need for constant attention to detail and particular examples rather than generalizations, which tend to be vague and therefore potentially misleading. The slower the route, the surer the safety at the end of it. That is why Wittgenstein said that in philosophy the winner is the one who finishes last. But we cannot escape language or the confusions to which it gives rise, except by dying. In the meantime, Wittgenstein offers four main methods to avoid philosophical confusion, as described by Norman Malcolm: describing circumstances in which a seemingly problematic expression might actually be used in everyday life, comparing our use of words with imaginary language games, imagining fictitious natural history, and explaining psychologically the temptation to use a certain expression inappropriately. The complex, intertwined relationship between a language and the form of life that goes with it means that problems arising from language cannot just be set aside&#8211;they infect our lives, making us live in confusion. We might find our way back to the right path, but there is no guarantee that we will never again stray. In this sense there can be no progress in philosophy. In 1931 Wittgenstein described his task thus: Language sets everyone the same traps; it is an immense network of easily accessible wrong turnings. And so we watch one man after another walking down the same paths and we know in advance where he wil